Where does this sort of slot in on the
spectrum of Del Toro's work, you know,
with like the Pan's Labyrinth and Shape
of Water on one end and Pacific Rim and
Blade 2 on the other? Which, by the way,
both ends of those spectrums are pretty
rad.
>> They are pretty rad. That's true.
Stories about generational trauma are
nothing new. Chronicles of the pain that
is handed down from parent to child and,
in time, right on down the line to the
next child, never breaking the cycle.
It's, as Mrs. Potts once said, a tale as
old as time. From Cronus eating his own
little ones, only to suffer the eventual
wrath of those children under the
leadership of Zeus, all the way to
Michael Corleone's fall into the very
underworld that his father hoped he
would rise above. The pain is real. It's
also a great avenue for telling
compelling stories. I'm Scott Collura
and this is my review of Guillermo del
Toro's Frankenstein.
I had determined that the memory of my
evils
should die with me.
Pretty much everyone knows the story of
Frankenstein and Del Toro, who has been
trying to get a movie based on the
iconic novel made for at least 20 years,
doesn't deviate from Mary Shelley's work
in any way that [music] anyone but fans
of the OG would notice. Some characters
are missing, others are added, but the
bones of the story remain intact. Man
makes monster, man rejects monster,
monster gets pissed off. But more than
just intact, these bones are also
seemingly pulled from, or is that carved
out of, Dr. Frankenstein's choicest
picks. His finest specimens. Because
this iteration of Frankenstein is, like
its creature, a beautiful, haunting
thing through which classic themes are
made to feel fresh [music] and new. Not
only is Oscar Isaac's Victor
Frankenstein a monster for much of the
film's [music] runtime, cue everyone's
favorite who's the real monster line,
but he's a monster who was spawned by a
monster. His stringent and abusive
father, Leopold, played by Charles
Dance, who at this point in his career
is destined to play the same miserable
[__] over and over again. So, of
course that generational pain continues
to rear its ugly head, or perhaps in
this case not so ugly, when Victor
brings life to his creature, played by a
scarred yet [music] still movie star
handsome Jacob Elordi. Elordi is a
marvel here and his creature exhibits
marvel-esque superhuman abilities, which
is fun, belaying his turns as bad guys
or unsympathetic characters in titles
like Euphoria, Priscilla, and Saltburn.
No, while the creature in GDT's
Frankenstein will mess you up if need be
and does, in fact, mess up man and beast
alike in spectacular fashion, Del Toro
writes him and Elordi plays him in the
finest Carloffian vein, a sympathetic
sad sack SOB who just wants a friend.
That the actor also seems to be
channeling the body work of Del Toro
regular and creature player
extraordinaire Doug Jones only
accentuates how different Elordi's
creature is from past [music]
incarnations. He pivots his body, twists
his waist, leans in and back, and [__]
his head in such a way as to always
remind us that, after all, the
creature's body is actually a series of
bodies that are still getting used to
each other. Isaac, as Victor, on the
other hand, runs the risk of becoming
too unlikable at times. When his
creature is born, there are genuine
moments of affection between the two,
but the newborn's apparent inability to
evolve and grow, in terms of speech, he
can't even get any further than saying
"Victor" over and over again, frustrates
the genius and frankly dickish doctor.
Just as his father did before him,
Victor punishes his child rather than
nurtures him and so the cycle continues
with the creature never even having a
chance at normalcy, his appearance
notwithstanding. But the result is that
Isaac's Victor very nearly becomes the
film's villain, which, [music] perhaps,
isn't a new concept in the Frankenstein
mythos, but occasionally works against
the film in the character's darkest
moments. Colin Clive, who played the mad
doctor opposite [music] Boris Karloff's
monster, was always sympathetic, mind
you, even when he was operating at peak
Looney Tunes. He's alive! And then
there's Mia Goth, who brings to the
Elizabeth Harlander character an
otherworldliness that has sort of become
a trademark for the Maxine and Suspiria
actress. Named Elizabeth Lavenza in the
book, the character is adopted into the
Frankenstein household and eventually
marries Victor, but in this version,
she's engaged to Victor's brother,
William. William usually doesn't make it
to adulthood when he's present in a
Frankenstein [music] story, falling
victim to the creature in a savage act
of revenge. But again, Del Toro tweaks
and twists these plot elements, with
William winding up in the way of
Victor's traditional love interest,
while also giving Elizabeth an uncle in
the person of Christoph Waltz's Heinrich
Harlander. And while Waltz is typically
a welcome addition to any film, his
character, a benefactor who pays for
Victor's experiments, ultimately doesn't
add much at all beyond helping to make
the film slightly longer than it needs
to be. Frankenstein is full of blood and
gore and dismembered limbs and ripped
off jaws and crushed skulls, [music]
but it's not a horror movie. Like the
director's 2015 gothic romance Crimson
Peak, this is a film that feels big,
engulfing the viewer in a world where a
sad wife's deep red gown is set against
the stark backdrop [music] of a
foreboding castle. It's a place where
the city streets run red with
slaughterhouse blood, where a frozen
battlefield is marked by a horse covered
in ice, still in mid-gallop with its
rider astride. And yet, at the same
time, the beauty of creation itself is
infectious,
>> [music]
>> as when Elordi's creature first
experiences the sun, as Victor tells
him, "Sun is life."
>> What manner of creature is that?
What manner of devil made him? Del Toro
also wears his geek cred on his sleeve.
The creature's design is very clearly
inspired by comics legend [music] Bernie
Wrightson's Frankenstein, while an early
experiment by Victor involves half a
corpse coming to life in a gasp-worthy
but somehow funny scene that feels
plucked right out of The Return of the
Living Dead. The combination of
influences fused together and brought to
life by a genius is especially fitting
here, given this movie's plot and the
100-plus years of adaptations [music]
Mary Shelley's work has endured. And
always, it's Del Toro's love of the
source material itself that shines
through as the filmmaker tells his
unique version of this classic story
while still paying respect to the
Shelley book that he [music] clearly
lives and breathes. Anyone who knows the
book can tell you that a happy ending
[music] does not seem in the cards for
either Victor or the creature. But for
Del Toro, the the Frankenstein family
deserves redemption after all those
years of suffering and self-inflicted
pain. That Del Toro chooses to tell his
story in two parts, one from Victor's
point of view and the other from the
creature's, only serves to drive home
that this is ultimately a story about
atonement and forgiveness. Can the
creature forgive Victor's failings as a
parent? Can Victor break the long cycle
of abuse? Well, you know what they say,
all you need is love.
Now,
run. I'm giving Frankenstein a nine out
of 10. Some of us have been waiting 20
years for Guillermo del Toro's
Frankenstein and the film does not
disappoint. The filmmaker puts all of
his skills to bear in this spin on the
Mary Shelley story as he goes for a tale
of tragedy, romance, and redemption,
rather than a straight horror flick,
which isn't to say that there isn't
plenty of gore or creepy moments, but
that's the trimmings of this film, as
blood red as they are. No, Del Toro's
really interested in, to paraphrase the
creature, why violence so often feels
inevitable and what it takes to stop it.
Hello, that is our review of Guillermo
del Toro's Frankenstein. I'm Clint Gage
and joining me is the reviewer of
Guillermo del Toro's Frankenstein, IGN's
associate director features Scott
Collura. Scott, what's up, dude? Not
much. How's it going? It's going, man.
It's going. So, this this is a movie
that months ago we were looking at the
release schedule and you like planted
your flag in this one. You were honestly
a little pushy about it. But what was it
about Frankenstein that had you so
excited to do this review? Well, you
know,
I'm an old school Frankenstein
guy,
uh, not just in the appearance, but also
as a fan. And, um,
uh,
you know, I interviewed Guillermo del
Toro, not to age myself too much, but I
interviewed him like 15 years ago about
this movie. Cuz he's been trying to make
this movie for at least 20 years. And,
uh, and I remember sitting with him in a
in a hotel lobby in Midtown talking to
him about it. He was promoting
uh, one of the Hellboys, maybe. I can't
even remember now what it was. And he
was so enthusiastic back then about
wanting to make this film. And then, of
course, he sort of famously has a lot of
dream projects that he that he's talked
about for a long time.
>> Right. But the chance as a fan of his
and as a fan of Frankenstein, the chance
to get to see him, uh, finally realize
this one, which is like a dream project
for him, I I just I had to, you know, I
love the Frankenstein movies and I love
him, so that's pretty much it. Yeah, Del
Toro's he's he's a guy that you root
for, yes, I feel like. He's, you know,
and and yeah, it's kind of his thing is
to have he's got a handful of movies and
it's always interesting for for us to
talk to filmmakers that have things in
development cuz you always want to ask,
"Well, what about this?"
>> Yeah, I mean, Del Toro like he is such a
fanboy, ultimately, right? Like you you
can just
watching the movie, but also just
talking to him, it's like his his
enthusiasm for these things is so strong
that it's like it's infectious, really,
you know. And it really it really shows
on screen. But like and and I know you
you mentioned that you're you're fan of
these movies from way back. I know that
you're the classic Universal Monsters
sort of catalog, all the old Boris
Karloff stuff. And I've been in meetings
with you where you've demanded to keep
Bride of Frankenstein near the top of
our best horror movies of all time list.
I mean, have you always been from from
way back a fan of of these classic
monster movies?
>> Yeah, I guess so. You know, it's that
one of those things where it's so hard
to remember now.
But I I think my earliest memory of
seeing the Universal Monster movies was
they used to do this thing in the summer
time where they would play films
at the school for the kids. Anyone could
just come for the afternoon and they'd
and they play movies in the auditorium
and they would play these what in
retrospect I realized were short
versions of the Universal movies,
monster movies, but they would only be
the parts with the monsters in them. All
the boring stuff with the humans was cut
out and I think they were like old super
eight millimeter silent reels that you
could buy. I'm not I'm not exactly sure.
But I fell in love with them then.
>> Yeah, Del Toro is he's such a
he's got such a distinct look to his
film. We've talked about it like how
much he's he's such a fanboy and and how
much he how much care and love goes into
eat every frame of his movies. So when
it comes to him making a movie,
Frankenstein, the movie that's been
remade and revisited literally for over
a century now.
What does a guy like Del Toro add to a
movie like Frankenstein? Yeah, it's a
good question. You know, it's
he I mean, he brings the Del Toroness to
it, right? It's such a sort of sweeping,
beautiful
gothic thing that he's doing. Like I
think he's gone on the record talking
about how it's not a horror movie and
it's really not. It's you know, it has
its scary bits and it has plenty of gory
bits, but [music] it's it's it's really
like a it's a gothic romance in a lot of
ways. It's also a you know, it's sort of
a a tragic tale for all the characters
involved, which isn't necessarily new to
Frankenstein either. But the way that
Del Toro depicts it all feels new and
fresh. His you know, the scope of things
is just
unparalleled in this movie in terms of
Frankenstein stories. Like you of course
remember the Kenneth Branagh
Frankenstein, which was called Mary
Shelley's Frankenstein and it was sort
of meant to be much more closely to the
book than the Karloff movies or most
sort of an answer to Bram Stoker's
Dracula Exactly. Yeah. A couple of years
prior.
>> was. Same producers as well, I think.
But it didn't really work out. This one
is more like Del Toro takes versions a
version of the book but does his own
thing with it. But pick picks the bits
that are most important to telling the
story he's trying to tell.
And he but he does it with that Del Toro
flare. I mean, like Mia Goth's wardrobe
alone, like the colors that she wears
are
Victor Frankenstein's mom is seen in
flashbacks in her as well. Like she's
she's dressed in striking red against
this like [music] sort of creepy dark
dark gothic castle that she lives in and
it's just
it's it's [music] it's when you watch
it, it's like yeah, this is the guy that
made Cronos, you know, like you can just
sense it. He made Cronos for like you
know, 1/100 of what the budget of what
this thing is. But this there's very
much a lot of the same vibe there as
well.
And you know, so I was anticipating that
from him and he and From from where I'm
sitting, he didn't disappoint at all.
Yeah, it is one of those projects that
the the match of filmmaker to the film
just makes too much sense to not be
excited about, you know.
>> Like Crimson Peak is probably the
closest analog in some ways just in
terms of the production design and
stuff. But that was also a gothic story.
But this feels even bigger than that, I
would say. Yeah, so I mean, in talking
about the rest of Del Toro's work, like
where does this sort of slot in,
you know, on on the spectrum of Del
Toro's work, you know, with like the
Pan's Labyrinth and Shape of Water on
one end and Pacific Rim and Blade II on
the other. Which by the way, both ends
of those spectrums are pretty rad, but
you know, it's a wide variety of movies
that the guy made.
>> Yes, they are they are pretty rad.
That's true.
It's you know, it's closer to
obviously it's closer to the Shape of
Water and the Crimson Peak side of
things. It's don't think this movie's
going to necessarily win any Oscars like
Shape of Water. Not that it shouldn't,
but you know, we just know how the
Oscars go and they don't
Yeah, you know, it's a monster movie,
right? So they don't they're they're
less inclined. Having said that, Shape
of Water was a monster movie. Like I
say, it's not like the sort of more
action oriented monsters for the fun of
it type vibe that Del Toro is so good
at. That's not what this movie is.
There's a romantic aspect to it. It's a
sort of a tragic story.
>> [music]
>> It's really beautifully acted. Like
Jacob Elordi's monster is much more the
the creature from Shape of Water than he
is a Hellboy monster, you know, he's
very very sympathetic and
he's he's just terrific. I mean, he's he
really like he pulled it off. Like the
guy from Euphoria is going to be the
monster? It's like yeah, he is the
monster. It's great. Yeah. Jacob Elordi,
the guy from Euphoria.
Um
Am I showing my age again? You're No,
you're trying you're trying to unshow
your age with that one, I think.
You're overcorrecting a little bit.